Energy Trends and Machine Learning Project

Overview

This project explores Morocco’s energy and trade metrics using data from The World Bank, focusing on trends, patterns, and predictive analytics with machine learning. The goal is to analyze Morocco's energy dependency, trade diversification, and renewable energy strategies, highlighting key economic insights.

Data Source

The primary data is sourced from the World Bank and comprises various metrics, including:

Energy consumption and production.

Trade metrics for ores, metals, fuels, and merchandise.

Natural resource rents and adjusted savings.

Additional metadata aligns with official international databases, including United Nations Comtrade and IEA Statistics (OECD/IEA 2014).

Project Goals

Trend Analysis: Understand historical trends in energy and trade-related data.

Pattern Discovery: Apply machine learning to find dependencies and relationships between variables.

Predictive Modeling: Forecast future metrics such as energy imports and renewable energy use.

Key Findings

1. Trade Analysis

Ores and Metals in Merchandise Exports

Observation: A decline in the percentage of ores and metals exports.

Possible Scenarios:

Scenario 1: Morocco has become a leader in the ores and metals transformation industry.

Scenario 2: Morocco has diversified its exports, reducing reliance on ores and metals.

Fuels in Merchandise Exports

Observation: Fuel exports remain consistently low, not exceeding 7% since 2016.

Interpretation:

Limited natural fuel resources.

Economic diversification into other sectors like agriculture and phosphates.

Ores and Metals Imports

Trend: Increasing since 2000.

Implication: Supports Morocco’s positioning as a transformation leader.

2. Energy Metrics

Fuel Imports

Trend: Decreasing since 2012.

Implications:

Increased energy independence through investments in renewable energy (e.g., Noor Ouarzazate).

Shift towards energy-efficient technologies and alternative sources.

Natural Resource Rents

Dominated by phosphate exports.

Low oil and gas rents align with Morocco’s minimal fossil fuel reserves.

Diversification strategies focus on renewable energy and manufacturing.

Adjusted Savings: Natural Resources Depletion (% of GNI)

Measures economic sustainability by accounting for resource depletion.

High percentages indicate potential overreliance on natural resource exploitation.

3. Energy Consumption

Energy Use: Increasing demand driven by industrialization and population growth.

Electric Power Consumption: Growth reflects technological advancement and electrification.

Renewable Energy Trends

Electricity Production from non-hydro renewables has risen significantly since 2009.

Renewable Energy Consumption: Remains below 24% due to intermittency challenges.

Machine Learning Workflow

Data Preprocessing: Preparing data for analysis, ensuring consistency across time periods.

Exploratory Data Analysis: Visualizing linear trends and correlations.

Model Training: Employing regression models and time series forecasting to predict key metrics.

Next Steps

Apply advanced machine learning models for improved accuracy.

Conduct topic-specific analysis on renewable energy’s impact on trade and GDP.

Integrate additional local data to refine predictions and enhance insights.

How to Run the Project

Clone this repository:

git clone https://github.com/yourusername/energy-trends-ml

Install required dependencies:

pip install -r requirements.txt

Run the Jupyter Notebook for analysis:

jupyter notebook Energy_Analysis.ipynb

License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the LICENSE file for more details.

Acknowledgements

World Bank for the primary data.

IEA and United Nations Comtrade for additional resources.

Contribution

Contributions are welcome! Please fork the repository and create a pull request with your proposed changes.


